
SiteSwap: An Introduction

1: What is SiteSwap, and why is it needed?
    Siteswap is a very simple and concise way of describing juggling patterns. Before SiteSwap was invented
    (it was developped seperately by three different groups of jugglers) there was no way of expressing a
    juggling pattern in words or text. Patterns could be expressed by drawings, or by diagrams such as 'ladder
    notation' or causation diagrams, but there was no way to tell somebody what a trick looked like without
    showing them or calling it by a generally accepted name, such as 'Three Ball Cascade', 'Five Ball Shower',
    &c.
    SiteSwap works by expressing a juggling pattern as a series of numbers, thus a trick can be described as
    '3' or '91' (Three Ball Cascade and Five Ball Shower respectively). As commas and brackets have special
    meanings in non-vanilla siteswap, the string of numbers is unbroken, and hence each throw is represented
    by a single digit number. In consequence, throws higher than a '9' are represented by the letters of the
    Latin alphabet, though as there is a limit to how high one can throw and how fast one can move (generally
    reckoned to be about an h, or the height of a seventeen ball shower) throws in the range a-h in patterns
    are rare enough to be virtually non-existent, and those above are never used.
    Originally SiteSwap could only express asynchronous, one- or two-handed, juggling patterns. This system is
    now generally known as 'Vanilla' SiteSwap, and various modifications have been made to it, of which the 
    synchronous and multiplex notations are now in common use. (Passing notation has also been developped, but
    is less common).
    
    SiteSwap however, like all other juggling notations, cannot do everything. Its main drawback is its lack
    of handling of what have been called 'distortions' of pure SiteSwap patterns. In this way, written in 
    SiteSwap notation, Mills' Mess (3) is the same as the Three Ball Cascade, and Burke's Barrage as pure 423
    (Sometimes called Fake Mess). There is an entire different system of notation to describe the hand
    movements of these pattern distortions, called Mills' Mess State Transition Diagrams - which are beyond
    scope of this document.*
    We shall here confine ourselves to Vanilla SiteSwap and its generally accepted more exotic forms: 
    multiplex and synchronous SiteSwap, with a brief treatment of passing implementations.
    
    *It should be noted, however, that MMSTDs only describe _some_ hand movements: Under-the-Hand and 
    Over-the-Top throws are accounted for, but Orbits, Claws, and trick throws such as Behind-the-Back are
    not.
    
2: Vanilla SiteSwap - An In-Depth Look
    Vanilla SiteSwap is the simplest form of siteswap notation, using simply the numbers from 0-h (base 18).
    Each number represents how high a ball is thrown. In this way, a 3 is the height of the throw for a Three
    Ball Cascade, a 4 for a four ball fountain and so on right up to h for a (theoretical) seventeen ball
    cascade. In this system, even numbers are 'self' throws; odds, crossing throws.
    The three integers 0, 1, and 2 have a special meaning in this system. You might think that a 2 would be
    half the height of a four, (or, if a physicist, a quarter: due to the inverse-square law, an increase of
    one in SiteSwap throw-height is approximately a doubling of Real-World throw height), but this is not the
    case. My approximate throw height when juggling Three Ball Cascade is 0.2m, and my time between throws 
    ~0.5s. In order to throw a 2, therefore, I would have to throw a 0.1m throw which would be back in my hand
    about half a second later. This is hardly a throw at all, and so by convention a two is a 'hold': i.e. the
    active ball remains in your hand ready to be thrown next time that hand is throwing. A one in SiteSwap,
    you might also think, would be a crossing throw at one quarter the height of a three: that is, at 0.05m
    and ready to be thrown within half a second: taking 0.3 seconds perhaps to reach its destination. In
    practice, then, a 1 tends to be a pass from one hand to the other, rather than a throw. A 0, the third
    special throw, is an empty hand.
    Using this system, many patterns can be written out: 3, 51, 4, and 40 are just some examples.* SiteSwap
    can also be used to discover new possible juggling patterns, as simple algorithms can be used to calculate
    whether or not a SiteSwap is valid. Take the pattern 423. You will notice that the sum of the pattern's
    throw values is 9, and the average throw value is three. If you know that 423 is a three ball pattern, you
    might wonder if this is a coincidence. It isn't. The average of any SiteSwap throw height = the number of
    balls used in the pattern: something which can check whether or not a pattern is valid. 41, for instance,
    is not valid, but 42 is. (It's two in one hand while holding a ball in the other). Some patterns with an
    integer average are also not valid as SiteSwaps, however. While 423 is a valid pattern, 432 is not. This
    is because, if you were to juggle 432, you would throw a self-four with your right hand, followed by a
    crossing three with your left. Your third throw would be a hold (2), and your next throw would be from
    your (now empty) left hand. You would then have to catch the first and second balls you threw in an 
    already-full right hand, at the same time. In order to calculate whether a potential SiteSwap is valid,
    then, another algorithm is needed. It simply involves summing the value and position of each throw in your
    siteswap (hence 432 becomes 4+1, 3+2, 2+3 = 5,5,5; while 423 becomes 4+1, 2+2, 3+3 = 5,4,6) If any of the
    numbers in this sum are the same, the pattern is invalid.
    
    *Three Ball Cascade and Shower, Four Ball Asynchronous Fountain, and 2 in 1 Hand, respectively.
    
3: Beyond Vanilla SiteSwap - Multiplexes and Synchronicity
    Vanilla siteswap is all well and good, but there is only so much that it can do. What if you want to 
    describe a 4-Ball Sync Fountain? Fortunately, an extended form of siteswap notation was created precisely 
    to solve this problem: Synchronous SiteSwap.
    Synchronous siteswap is written thusly: (44). Any two throws made at the same time from different hands are 
    written inside parentheses, first the throw from your hand which would throw next in an async pattern, then
    the one which just threw.
    
    Multiplexes can also be written in this form of siteswap, in the form [35]. Putting two throws in square brackets
    denotes throwing them from the same hand, at the same time.
    
    Finally, crossing throws can be denoted as 4x. Any even number is normally a 'self' throw: that is, it is caught
    by the hand which threw it. If one wants a crossing even throw, putting an x after it is the accepted siteswap
    notation. There is no equivalent for self-odds.
    
4: Passing Patterns - A Rare SiteSwap Form
    Passing patterns can be represented in the form <XXX|YYY>, where XXX is the siteswap of the first juggler's
    pattern, and YYY the siteswap of the second. A throw Xp denotes a passing throw, so <3p3|3p3> is a 'two-count'
    pattern with six props. 
    
Appendix A: A Brief History of SiteSwap Notation
    
    
Appendix B: A Glance at Other Forms of Juggling Notation
    Mills-Mess State Diagrams
    
    Ladder Notation
    
    
Appendix C: Common Patterns and Their SiteSwaps
    N-Ball Cascade: N (when N is odd)
    N-Ball Fountain: N (when N is even)
    N-Ball Shower: M1 (Where M = 2N-1)
    Fake Mess: 423
    
